docs: design doc for node loss (#12253)
rook/rook: design/ceph/node-loss-rbd-rwo.md

```

Example of a NetworkFence CR that the Rook operator would create when a node is lost:

```yaml
apiVersion: csiaddons.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: NetworkFence
metadata:
  name: <name> # We will keep the name the same as the node name
  namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
spec:
  driver: <driver-name> # for us it will `rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com`
  fenceState: <fence-state> # For us it will be `Fenced`
  cidrs:
    - <nodeIP>
  secret:
    name: <csi-rbd-provisioner-secret-name>
    namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
  parameters:
    clusterID: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
```

> Note: This will be enabled by default in rook, in the case for some reason user wants to disable this feature in rook can edit `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap and update the `ROOK_WATCH_FOR_NODE_FAILURE: "false"`.

## How get which NodeIp to block

There are multiple networking options available for example, host Networking, Pod networking, Multus etc. This make it difficult to know which NodeIp address to blockList.
For this we'll follow the following approach which will work for all networking options(but still will not work for external cluster which nodeIps):

> 1. Get the `volumesInUse` from the node which has the taint `out-of-service`

Reviewer: How do we query the volumesInUse?

Author: To blocklist the ip we need the image, to get the image from the pv we'll compare it with pv.

Reviewer: There is no field called `volumesInUse`, right? Maybe just put it in separate words then.
```suggestion
1. Get the volumes in use from the node which has the taint `out-of-service`
```

Reviewer 2: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.27/#nodestatus-v1-core

Actually there is a field but I am not sure what it refers too or how it is constructed. 
We'll need to make sure that it is the same across k8s release, has a consistent pattern and stable for us to use it.

```
 volumesAttached:
  - devicePath: ""
    name: kubernetes.io/csi/rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com^0001-0009-rook-ceph-0000000000000002-0ea0490d-2b28-40f8-a812-5e98de2b3a55
  volumesInUse:
  - kubernetes.io/csi/rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com^0001-0009-rook-ceph-0000000000000002-0ea0490d-2b28-40f8-a812-5e98de2b3a55
 ```
 
 @subhamkrai have you looked deeper into this ? 
 
 cc @Madhu-1

Author: yes there is the field, if a volume is mounted on that node

Reviewer: Perfect, I had overlooked the `volumesInUse`

2. List all the pv and compare with value of `volumesInUse`

> 3. Once, above mataches:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. For Ceph volumes on that node:
```

>    1. If RBD PVC makes use of the rbd status API

Reviewer: We will query `rbd status`? Or what do you mean we make use of the rbd status API or the `ceph fs client ls`? Please explain more how these are queried. Maybe it would clarify if we separated RBD and CephFS into separate sections.

Author: Maybe this https://github.com/rook/rook/issues/11372#issuecomment-1336809035 will explain all. Let me know if you want to add something specific

Reviewer: I see you have an example on line 77 below. How about moving that example up here by this bullet, and then have a cephfs example by bullet 2?

   2. If CephFS PVC uses ceph fs client ls  API

    example:

    ```console
    $ rbd status <image_name>
    Watchers:
    watcher=172.21.12.201:0/4225036114 client.17881 cookie=18446462598732840961
    ```

> 4. we'll get ips from step 3(in above example `172.21.12.201:0/4225036114` )and then we'll blocklist the entire ip with port.

Reviewer: So we would blocking `172.21.12.201:0/4225036114` or the entire ip `172.21.12.201`?

Reviewer: This IP will always represent a consistent IP address for that node, either from host networking or the holder pod?

Author: yes, it will consistent for all cases.

Author: only multiple clusters with the same nodeIp will not be covered.

> 4. we'll get ips from step 3(in above example `172.21.12.201:0/4225036114` )and then we'll blocklist the entire ip with port.

Reviewer: nits
```suggestion
4. Get IPs from step 3 (in above example `172.21.12.201:0/4225036114`)
5. Blocklist the entire ip with port.
```

Reviewer: How about moving the NetworkFence CR section from above to after this bullet? Then we can see how the node is blocklisted.

Author: done

# or
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoSchedule
```

> Note: This will be enabled by default in rook if the NetworkFence CR is found, in the case for some reason user wants to disable this feature in rook can edit `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap and update the `ROOK_WATCH_FOR_NODE_FAILURE: "false"`.

## How get which CIDR to block

There are multiple networking options available for example, host Networking, Pod networking, Multus etc. This make it difficult to know which NodeIp address to blockList.
For this we'll follow the following approach which will work for all networking options(but still will not work for external cluster which nodeIps):

1. Get the `volumesInUse` from the node which has the taint `out-of-service`

2. List all the pv and compare with value of `volumesInUse`

3. For Ceph volumes on that node:

   1. If RBD PVC makes use of the rbd status API
      1. example:

    ```console
    $ rbd status <image_name>
    Watchers:
    watcher=172.21.12.201:0/4225036114 client.17881 cookie=18446462598732840961
    ```

   1. If CephFS PVC uses ceph fs client ls  API
      1.

>         ```TODO```

Reviewer: What is the command?

Reviewer: Per discussion, we will go ahead with this design doc and implement for RBD, then revisit CephFS

Reviewer 3: you can use `ceph tell mds.0 client ls` command to list cephfs clients

For this we'll follow the following approach which will work for all networking options(but still will not work for external cluster which nodeIps):

1. Get the `volumesInUse` from the node which has the taint `out-of-service`

2. List all the pv and compare with value of `volumesInUse`

3. For Ceph volumes on that node:

   1. If RBD PVC makes use of the rbd status API
      1. example:

    ```console
    $ rbd status <image_name>
    Watchers:
    watcher=172.21.12.201:0/4225036114 client.17881 cookie=18446462598732840961
    ```

   2. If CephFS PVC uses ceph fs client ls  API
      1.
        ```Will add example for Cephfs```

4. Get IPs from step 3 (in above example `172.21.12.201:0/4225036114`)
5. Blocklist the entire ip with port.

Example of a NetworkFence CR that the Rook operator would create when a node is lost:

```yaml
apiVersion: csiaddons.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: NetworkFence
metadata:
  name: <name> # We will keep the name the same as the node name
  namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
spec:
  driver: <driver-name> # for us it will `rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com`
  fenceState: <fence-state> # For us it will be `Fenced`
  cidrs:

>     - <172.21.12.201:0/4225036114> # from above section, how to get node ip to block

Reviewer: Step 5 above says "Blocklist the entire ip with port". This looks like it is just blocklisting the specific CIDRs. So we aren't blocklisting the entire IP, right? Should it say "Blocklist the endpoint where the volumes are found connected"?

Author: changed to `Blocklist the endpoint where the volumes are  mounted`

  secret:
    name: <csi-rbd-provisioner-secret-name>
    namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
  parameters:
    clusterID: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
```

> ## Once the Node is back online, How to bring it back in rook-ceph cluster?

Reviewer: nit: Titles are best short. Then in the paragraph have full sentences and questions
```suggestion
## Bringing a node back online
```

Once the node is back online, the admin removes the taint.

> 1. we first need to remove the taint

Reviewer: Keep instructions as direct commands in third person (don't mention we, you, etc)
```suggestion
1. Remove the taint
```

> # Recover RBD RWO Pod in case of Node Loss

Reviewer 3: if you want to cover cephfs you might need to update the title and the filename.

Author: updated

- Remove the volume attachment from the lost node
- Delete the old pod on the lost node
- Create a new pod on the new node
- Allow the volume to be attached to the new node

Once this taint is applied manually, rook will create a [NetworkFence CR](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/docs/networkfence.md). The [csi-addons operator](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons) will then blocklist the node to prevent any ceph rbd client on the lost node from writing any more data.

After the new pod is running on the new node and the old node which was lost comes back, rook will delete the [NetworkFencr CR](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/docs/networkfence.md).

example of taint to be applied to lost node:

```console
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute
# or
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoSchedule
```

> > Note: This will be enabled by default in rook if the NetworkFence CR is found, in the case for some reason user wants to disable this feature in rook can edit `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap and update the `ROOK_WATCH_FOR_NODE_FAILURE: "false"`.

Reviewer 3: `This will be enabled by default in rook if the NetworkFence CR is found,` should be `This will be enabled by default in Rook if the NetworkFence CRD is found,`

in few places `rook` is used with all small case it should be changed to `Rook`?

## How get which CIDR to block

There are multiple networking options available for example, host Networking, Pod networking, Multus etc. This make it difficult to know which NodeIp address to blockList.
For this we'll follow the following approach which will work for all networking options(but still will not work for external cluster which nodeIps):

1. Get the `volumesInUse` from the node which has the taint `out-of-service`.

2. List all the pv and compare the pv `spec.volumeHandle` with the node `volumesInUse` field `volumeHandle`

>    1. Example:
> 
>       Below is sample Node volumeInUse field
> 
>     ```
>       volumesInUse:
>         - kubernetes.io/csi/rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com^0001-0009-rook-ceph-0000000000000002-24862838-240d-4215-9183-abfc0e9e4002
> 
>       # Note: The volumeInUse naming convention are `kubernetes.io/csi/ + CSI driver name + ^ + volumeHandle`
>     ```
> 
>      and the following is pv `volumeInHandle`
> 
>      ```
>       volumeHandle: 0001-0009-rook-ceph-0000000000000002-24862838-240d-4215-9183-abfc0e9e4002
>     ```

Author: ```suggestion
   1. Example:

      Below is sample Node volumeInUse field

    ```
      volumesInUse:
        - kubernetes.io/csi/rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com^0001-0009-rook-ceph-0000000000000002-24862838-240d-4215-9183-abfc0e9e4002

      # Note: The volumeInUse naming convention are `kubernetes.io/csi/ + CSI driver name + ^ + volumeHandle`
    ```

     and the following is pv `volumeInHandle`

     ```
      volumeHandle: 0001-0009-rook-ceph-0000000000000002-24862838-240d-4215-9183-abfc0e9e4002
    ```
```

@travisn @Rakshith-R I added this section to clear `volumeInUse` and `volumeHandle` names.

3. For Ceph volumes on that node:

   1. If RBD PVC makes use of the rbd status API
      1. example:

    ```console
    $ rbd status <image_name>
    Watchers:
    watcher=172.21.12.201:0/4225036114 client.17881 cookie=18446462598732840961
    ```

   2. If CephFS PVC uses ceph fs client ls  API
      1.
        ```TODO```

4. Get IPs from step 3 (in above example `172.21.12.201:0/4225036114`)
5. Blocklist the endpoint where the volumes are mounted.

Example of a NetworkFence CR that the Rook operator would create when a node is lost:

```yaml
apiVersion: csiaddons.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: NetworkFence
metadata:
  name: <name> # We will keep the name the same as the node name
  namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
spec:
  driver: <driver-name> # for us it will `rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com`
  fenceState: <fence-state> # For us it will be `Fenced`
  cidrs:

>     - <172.21.12.201:0/4225036114> # from above section, how to get node ip to block

Reviewer 3: you should blocklist the IP and not worry about the `nonce`

  secret:
    name: <csi-rbd-provisioner-secret-name>

>     namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>

Reviewer 3: you can get the secret and secret name from the PV object.

  parameters:

>     clusterID: <ceph-cluster-namespace>

Reviewer 3: not always true, you can check the PV object to get the clusterID.

```

## Bringing a node back online

Once the node is back online, the admin removes the taint.

1. Remove the taint

```console
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute-
# or
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoSchedule-
```

1. Rook will detect the taint is removed from the node, and immediately unfence the node by deleting the corresponding networkFence CR.

## Automation to taint a node

Rook will not automate tainting the node when they go offline. This is a decision the admin needs to make. But Rook will consider creating a sample script to watch for unavailable nodes and automatically taint the node based on how long node is offline. The admin can choose to enable the automated taints by running this example script.

## Open Design Questions

> 1. How to handle MultiCluster scenarios where two different node on different clusters have the same overlapping IP's.

Reviewer 3: The above design is not considering the radosnamespace (required to run rbd status CLI command) and subvolumegroups (for later)

Author: I'm missing here, Do you want to add this line or what you are suggesting here?

# Recover RBD RWO Pod in case of Node Loss

## Goal

> Faster RBD RWO recovery in case of node loss.

Reviewer 2: Even though the RWO recovery only specifically haunts RBD, CephFS clients may also cause data
corruption from lost nodes.

@Madhu-1 , I vaguely remember that network fence CR (blocklist cmd) also blocks io for cephfs completely, can you please confirm this ? 

If this is the case, then we can make the design generic both to prevent data corruption and for faster RWO volume recovery in node loss scenario.

Reviewer: The CephFS corruption would only happen at the application layer, right? Basically, it's the same as a power loss scenario. While it's true that the blocklist would affect both cephfs and rbd volumes that had been on that node, does rook actually need to blocklist the node if only cephfs volumes were running there?

Reviewer 2: > The CephFS corruption would only happen at the application layer, right? Basically, it's the same as a power loss scenario. While it's true that the blocklist would affect both cephfs and rbd volumes that had been on that node, does rook actually need to blocklist the node if only cephfs volumes were running there?

I think we can keep it generic. The same application pod will be force deleted(k8s etcd database, it may still be running on the  lost data) and started on another data, therefore, there is chances of data corruption for both rbd and cephfs.

## Problem

> When a  node is lost where a pod is running with the RBD RWO volume is mounted. The volume cannot be mounted on another node since it could cause corruption if two clients are writing to the same volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a node is lost where a pod is running with the RBD RWO volume is mounted, the volume cannot automatically be mounted on another node. If two clients are write to the same volume it could cause corruption. The node must be guaranteed to be down before the volume can be mounted on another node.
```

## Current Solution

> We have a manual solution to the problem which involves forceful deletion of a pod so that forced detachment and attachment work is possible. The problem with the current solution is that it takes around 11min to recover and also there are still chances of data corruption when the old pod on the lost node comes back online, this can cause multiple writers and lead to data corruption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have a manual solution to the problem which involves forceful deletion of a pod so that forced detachment and attachment work is possible. The problem with the current solution is that even after the forced pod deletion it takes around 11 minutes for the volume to mount on the new node. Also there are still chances of data corruption if the old pod on the lost node comes back online, causing multiple writers and lead to data corruption.
```

## Proposed Solution

> Note: This solution requires minimum kubernetes version 1.26.0

> We will use kubernetes beta feature [Non-Graceful Node Shutdown](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/12/16/kubernetes-1-26-non-graceful-node-shutdown-beta/) which will handle the volume detachment and attachment to the new node and deletion of the older pod on the lost node. To trigger this event for kubernetes we need to apply the taint  `out-of-service` manually.

Reviewer: How about a bullet list to show what the feature does for us?
```suggestion
The kubernetes feature [Non-Graceful Node Shutdown](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/12/16/kubernetes-1-26-non-graceful-node-shutdown-beta/) is available starting in K8s 1.26 to help improve the volume recovery during node loss. When a node is lost, the admin is required to add the taint `out-of-service` manually to the node. After the node is tainted, K8s will:
- Remove the volume attachment from the lost node
- Delete the old pod on the lost node
- Allow the volume to be attached to the new node
```

> > Make sure to remove the taint `out-of-service` once the node is back in a good state.

Reviewer: How about a separate section header later in the doc to describe how to bring the lost node back online?

> Once this taint is applied manually, rook will create [NetworkFencr CR](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/docs/networkfence.md) using [csi-addons operator](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons) which prevent ceph rbd client from communicating with lost node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once this taint is applied manually, rook will create a [NetworkFence CR](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/docs/networkfence.md). The [csi-addons operator](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons) will then blocklist the node to prevent any ceph rbd client on the lost node from writing any more data.
```

> After the new pod is running on the new node and the old node which was lost comes back, rook will delete the [NetworkFencr CR](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/docs/networkfence.md).

Reviewer: How about a bullet list of the sequence of actions to bring a node back online?

example of taint to be applied to lost node:

```console
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute
# or
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoSchedule
```

to remove the taint:

```console
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute-
# or
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoSchedule-
```

> Examples of NetworkFence CR:

Reviewer: Clarify that the rook operator will create this. The user doesn't need to create it.

```yaml
apiVersion: csiaddons.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: NetworkFence
metadata:
  name: <name> # We will keep the name the same as the node name
  namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
spec:
  driver: <driver-name> # for us it will `rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com`
  fenceState: <fence-state> # For us it will be `Fenced`
  cidrs:
    - <nodeIP>
  secret:
    name: <csi-rbd-provisioner-secret-name>
    namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
  parameters:
    clusterID: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
```

> Note: This will be enabled by default in rook, in the case for some reason user wants to disable this feature in rook can edit `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap and update the `ROOK_WATCH_FOR_NODE_FAILURE: "false"`.

> 

Reviewer: How about another section to discuss the possibility of adding the out-of-service taint automatically? I'm thinking we can provide a sample script that would add the taint automatically if a node is offline for too long (timeout would be configurable). The Rook operator wouldn't automate this, but the admin could choose to run the script if they want to automate it.

Author: added

> ## Open Design Questions

Reviewer 2: Let's have different scenarios in different points ?

- CSI Pods running on host network: this scenario we're sure nodeplugin pod IP is the same as node IP. (We can aim to solve this case first and follow up with enhancements on other cases)
- CSI Pods running on pod network of holder pod *
- CSI Pods running on multus network *
- CSI Pods and Ceph cluster running multus network *

In the last three cases :* CNI(gateway/Nat) may be involved in this case, we'll have to double check this to make the IP we're blocklisting is the same one that is visible to the cephcluster as client.

Reviewer 3: Even you can have a gateway/NAT with host networking.

Author: need to more understanding about gateways, will update that section later

Reviewer: Except the first case, the holder pod is used for all those (multus) scenarios, right?

Reviewer 2: > Except the first case, the holder pod is used for all those (multus) scenarios, right?

yes

Reviewer: @subhamkrai Please add a section to this design doc that explains the different scenarios for determining which IP to blocklist.

> 1. How to handle MultiCluster scenarios

Reviewer: Explain more why this is an open question, with multiple nodes with overlapping IPs

> 2. How to get node IP in case of gateway/NAT for blocking node IP.

Reviewer: There are two scenarios I'm aware of:
- The CSI driver is using host networking and we blocklist the host IP
- The CSI driver is using a holder pod, so we would blocklist the holder IP

How does the gateway/NAT fit in here?

Author: will update more on this later

Reviewer: Do we have details on this yet?

Author: with rbd watchers, gateway/nad scenarios is covered, so I'll probably remove that.

# Recover RBD RWO Pod in case of Node Loss

## Goal

Faster RBD RWO recovery in case of node loss.

## Problem

When a node is lost where a pod is running with the RBD RWO volume is mounted, the volume cannot automatically be mounted on another node. If two clients are write to the same volume it could cause corruption. The node must be guaranteed to be down before the volume can be mounted on another node.

## Current Solution

> We have a manual solution to the problem which involves forceful deletion of a pod so that forced detachment and attachment work is possible. The problem with the current solution is that even after the forced pod deletion it takes around 11 minutes for the volume to mount on the new node. Also there are still chances of data corruption if the old pod on the lost node comes back online, causing multiple writers and lead to data corruption.

Reviewer: To be clear, the current solution documents to blocklist the node as seen [here](https://rook.io/docs/rook/latest/Troubleshooting/ceph-csi-common-issues/#node-loss), so the corruption wouldn't happen if those steps are followed.

Reviewer: Please clarify in the doc that if the existing steps were followed, corruption was not a risk.

Author: in the `current Solution` section right?

Reviewer: yes, thanks

After the new pod is running on the new node and the old node which was lost comes back, rook will delete the [NetworkFencr CR](https://github.com/csi-addons/kubernetes-csi-addons/blob/main/docs/networkfence.md).

example of taint to be applied to lost node:

```console
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute
# or
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoSchedule
```

Examples of NetworkFence CR(rook operator will create this for us):

```yaml
apiVersion: csiaddons.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: NetworkFence
metadata:
  name: <name> # We will keep the name the same as the node name
  namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
spec:
  driver: <driver-name> # for us it will `rook-ceph.rbd.csi.ceph.com`
  fenceState: <fence-state> # For us it will be `Fenced`
  cidrs:
    - <nodeIP>
  secret:
    name: <csi-rbd-provisioner-secret-name>
    namespace: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
  parameters:
    clusterID: <ceph-cluster-namespace>
```

> > Note: This will be enabled by default in rook, in the case for some reason user wants to disable this feature in rook can edit `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap and update the `ROOK_WATCH_FOR_NODE_FAILURE: "false"`.

Author: with this option, the user could enable/disable it according to their requirements.

> > Note: This will be enabled by default in rook, in the case for some reason user wants to disable this feature in rook can edit `rook-ceph-operator-config` configmap and update the `ROOK_WATCH_FOR_NODE_FAILURE: "false"`.

Author: yes

## Once the Node is back online, How to bring it back in rook-ceph cluster?

> Once the node is back online,

Reviewer: The admin needs to remove the taint, right? Rook doesn't do it. (delete line 64, no need for it)
```suggestion
Once the node is back online, the admin removes the taint.
```

1. we first need to remove the taint

```console
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoExecute-
# or
kubectl taint nodes <node-name> node.kubernetes.io/out-of-service=nodeshutdown:NoSchedule-
```

1. Delete the networkFence CR(rook operator will do it for us)

## Approach to Automate the tainting of the node

> We could do this via a script where admin can choose to run the script to automatically taint the node based on how long node is offline and this time we'll have as configurable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rook will not automate tainting the node when they go offline. This is a decision the admin needs to make. But Rook will consider creating a sample script to watch for unavailable nodes and automatically taint the node based on how long node is offline. The admin can choose to enable the automated taints by running this example script.
```
